Hi Chris.
You can't see me. Greg. Greg.
Oh, right, sorry. Caught me out there.
Um, hi Greg O'Connor.
I'm the, uh, chair of the particular committee.
We'll just introduce ourselves
and then we'll get back to you.
On my right, I have
Hi, Paula Garcia, a national MP for New Lynn in Auckland,
Uh, and Hamish Campbell MP
for Island down in Christchurch.
And I think, you know,
Hi Catherine. You can't
quite see me on screen, but hi. Hi.
Just here to support you and, uh, all best.
Alright, um, welcome, um, Catherine.
Um, so,
and thank you for your flexibility, um, around our timings.
It's, uh, been, uh, with weather
and funerals, it's been, uh, quite the need to be flexible,
so we appreciate, um, you with that.
So now 10 minutes, take your,
you can take your submission as read.
Um, preferably leave time for questions.
So the, the floor or the airwaves are yours.
Katherine, we can't hear you.
Um, no volume, no. Yes.
Okay. Yeah. Can you hear me clearly?
Yeah, you got,
you could turn up a little bit
if you've got any volume there.
Yeah, I am as turned up
as it can be. Um, oh,
That's fine. No, that's fine.
We'll manage, we
Might, we might all just have to turn our hearing aids up.
Alright. That was a joke, but anyway.
Oh, no, no, no. I just, I didn't, I was looking across.
No one did. So it's, we're all,
We're all, we're all pre I'm completely deaf from one
ear. So anyway, we
We're all, we're all pre airing aid.
All right. All right.
Kiata Kato, um, I'm going to read my thoughts,
um, out to you today.
So my name is Catherine Cook, um, and I'm here
before you today, not only as a petitioner,
but as a fifth generation New Zealander, a mother
of two service children, a daughter, a wife, a friend,
a business woman who's provided income to hundreds
and a woman determined
to survive triple negative breast cancer.
One of the most aggressive forms of cancer there is.
I'm also here to talk about Tamco and tki, which is Hope
and Care because I believe when the system
fails, we must speak up.
As the committee should be aware,
the keynote 5 2 2 clinical trial led
to Keytruda being recognized
as the globally standard treatment
for early stage triple negative breast cancer.
It includes Keytruda immunotherapy alongside chemotherapy.
As stated in my petition, I'm here today
for every New Zealand woman and for their families facing
or yet to face early stage of this disease, all
who will carry the emotional
and crippling cruel financial weight alongside them.
I didn't choose cancer, none of us do,
but I have chosen how I respond by standing up
for what I know is wrong.
I've given this petition purpose to Monaco hope for us all
women across New Zealand didn't ask me to do this,
but they are relying on me to give them hope for a future
and the chance to live and be purposeful in their lives.
This is no longer my standard.
It's for every friend, stranger
and woman yet to be diagnosed.
I also want our health system to reflect tki,
which is the stewardship of the promise to care for
and protect for our people.
The system is broken
and requires urgent funding is highlighted in the
New Zealand Herald two weeks ago by the chair
of farm at Paula Bennett.
I come from Humble beginning one
of eight children raised in a state house from a mother
who works three jobs from here.
I learned resilience, hard work,
and the importance of lifting others.
I bought my first house at 21
and I engaged in ensuring I had insurances
to not be a burden on the public system.
My drive and independence have guided me through life
and business, but nothing's prepared me for this.
When I was diagnosed, I was advised
by the public breast screen nurse to take up
to three months to choose a surgeon.
That night I realized I didn't have a week,
let alone three months.
This was my first observation of realizing I needed
to advocate hard for myself.
Already I was being disadvantaged.
I appointed a surgeon, and within a week Keytruda became my
necessary treatment plan, my lifeline, to live
for an aggressive cancer that previously has limited hope
for the record, it costs me $9,000 per dose, plus up
to $3,000 every three weeks
to have Keytruda administered privately.
Due to the New Zealand health system mandating
that unfunded drug cannot be delivered in public care,
the drug has worked, the treatment has worked.
The tremor was not visible By week six,
leaving only the housing unit,
but small cancer cells have remained
meaning I need to forge.
On my 26-year-old cancer buddy has had her early stage
triple negative cancer eradicated
by using Keytruda at the cost of saving for a home.
This is wrong even now.
Although the drug is co-shared subsidized
by the drug manufacturer, I still find myself having
to find $3,000 every three weeks for the administration
of the drug to the New Zealand health system.
'cause the New Zealand health system mandates saying I can
only receive the unfunded drug in private.
Just so you know, I have
to pay GST on this 15% on a lifesaving treatment.
This is criminal. I had insurance, top tier medical.
In fact, I have insurance, top tier medical,
and I did everything right.
Yet after five months,
my health insurance is completely tapped out
until February next year.
And now all costs fall to me personally.
I can only be treated in private again,
the government is mandating.
I can only get my unfunded drugs in private to live.
My family decided that we would need
to sell our family home and our business.
And so we listed in a tough economic environment.
As you can all appreciate, homes aren't selling
and no one will lend without certainty.
The situation forced us to be unable
to fix our interest rate whilst selling, sending interest
and cost storing.
To be clear, I'm bearing my soul to all of you.
We've lost over $700,000.
I'm also having to beg with a give a little page
and I, I should surely be focused on getting well.
It goes against my personal values to ask for money.
And still, I'm here standing for all women, their families
and communities challenging why we are not valued.
I'm asking the government to choose a recommendation
for aggressive cancer.
I'm asking the government why they chose
to take a recommendation for aggressive cancer
and only fund advanced stage only.
Surely early prevention, early intervention as prevention
cancer can be life limiting,
but it's not our biggest threat.
The stress, the financial strain
and system failures are life threatening too.
There've been moments when I've cried, shouted,
and I wanna give up the guilt of financial,
crippling our family and
not being able to leave my children.
A legacy weighs heavy on me,
however, I cannot stand by while our system fails women
who give so much to us.
So I keep pushing on survivorship.
With triple negative breast cancer comes
with a pressure greater than the disease itself.
And more so by being born in New Zealand, we're forced
to make life or death choices.
It's not about treatment options, but about affordability.
We've suddenly become transactions, not patients.
I wanna live and be pur purposeful.
I wanna teach my children the value of savings.
I wanna be resilient.
But those lessons, they all feel hollow when everything
you've built is taken in the blink of an eye
as we are now experiencing as the committee are aware,
farm Act recommended Keytruda should be funded
for early stage triple negative cancer two years ago.
I see it's now being moved to the option
for investment list waiting for funding for clarity.
I wrote to Christopher Luxon earlier this year
who referred me to David Seymour
and his response was insensitive
and encouraging me to speak
to my healthcare provider about alternatives.
There are none other than what is recommended by
we either pay or we play Russian roulette and go without.
In three years, women have died or family,
or have been financially crippled.
Families are broken, women are writing goodbye
letters to their families.
The equality is so bad
that sisters are not supporting each other
at a time where they could.
Knowing one may be receiving treatment in private
and the other in public is not.
However, I can assure you, neither of us are better off
as New Zealanders we're told Keytruda is funded,
but that is misleading.
The government needs to be clear on what is funded.
Triple negative breast cancer is only funded for advanced
disease, only leaving most of us in devastating crisis
with a life limiting disease.
Untreated funding advance is often too late.
I ask you to committee, should an aggressive cancer
with limited treatment options have
its only proven treatment.
Waiting three years still be unfunded.
It's not a question of policy, it's a question of values.
What if I was your wife, your sister, your daughter,
your friend, your neighbor.
Funding early saves lives
and it saves the government money across health, welfare,
and mental health systems.
How can we invite people to live
and settle here in New Zealand when we can't even support
our own people in a time of need?
Preventing the worst outcome is not just compassionate,
it's economically sensible.
In closing, I want to remind the committee
that life tests us.
It cracks our armor. It also reveals our resilience
and our duty to one another.
I cannot control my diagnosis. I'm fighting hard.
I'm pleading for compassion, logic,
and justice from the committee and from the government.
I wanna grow old. I wanna hold my future grandchildren.
I wanna live a life where surviving cancer
doesn't mean losing everything else.
Treatment like Keytruda must be available
when they're needed most.
And early diagnosing without proper treatment is
negligent in my view.
I'm not here for sympathy, I'm here for action.
We need immediate funding of Keytruda
for early stage triple negative breast cancer.
We need it recognized as a standard treatment guideline
as it is globally, and we need a medicine budget
that reflects the value of human life, separate,
substantial, substantial,
and responsive to scientific progress.
I've given this fight a name to Manco Hope
for women across New Zealand and their families.
I stand as a voice of face and a mother.
For every woman who cannot stand here herself,
please make our system reflect the stewardship of TKI
to care, protect, and trust our people
because every life matters
and no one should know extreme hardship
or be denied the very treatment
to stay alive in New Zealand.
Again, I remind you I didn't choose to get cancer.
I'd like to acknowledge the unsung heroes,
the Breast Cancer Foundation, who rely on fundraising
for advocacy and support us in our darkest hours.
I'd now like to hand over some of my time here today
to the CEO Aileen Rayna and Head of Research
and strategic programs, me from the Breast Cancer Foundation
who stand united with me in
their petition for their thoughts.
Right? Thank Welcome, Arlene.
I'm Arlene Rainer. I'm the CEO
of Breast Cancer Foundation.
I'm going to hand over to Mei
and I will be on hand as backup and support
Koto. Um, thank
you very much for the opportunity to speak.
I would like to also acknowledge, um, the courage
and resilience of Catherine.
Um, she's pulled this petition together at the hardest
period of time in her life
when she should be focused on getting well
and get going through her very difficult treatments.
And she's doing this on behalf of women in New Zealand.
And, um, we hope that it eventually gets to a stage
that this medicine
and other medicines are funded for people like Catherine.
Um, triple negative breast cancer is the most aggressive
and deadliest form of breast cancer.
It grows and spreads faster than other types
of breast cancer and is most likely to come back.
Currently. There is no funded treatment for
early triple negative breast cancer apart from chemotherapy.
Keytruda is the only targeted treatment
that works specifically for triple negative breast cancer.
In October, 2024,
after two years of advocacy, Keytruda was approved
for funding by far neck,
but only for the advanced stage of the disease
where the cancer has spread
and the disease has become terminal
and not for the early stages of the breast cancer.
When we have an opportunity to reduce the risk of recurrence
and go for a cure,
this doesn't make sense.
Medicines for advanced breast cancer are
necessary, don't get me wrong.
We need them because they prolong the life of patients
who are, who have reached a advanced stage.
But we also need them for early stages of the disease
because this is when we have the opportunity
to reduce the risk of the cancer coming back
on behalf of patients
and clinicians in New Zealand as well
as more than 17,000 people who have signed this petition.
We ask that this lifesaving medicine is funded
for early stage triple negative breast cancer
as soon as possible.
We are aware that
after much advocacy that started from November, 2022,
pharma has finally completed their assessments.
They have recommended Keytruda for funding for stage two
and three early triple negative breast cancer.
But this is where the problem starts, uncertainty and time.
And for patients like Catherine, time is of the essence.
Every day without targeted treatment
means increased chance of the cancer coming back
and spreading and causing real harm.
But unfortunately, when a medicine ends up on PX options
for investment list, there's no guaranteed funding
or certainty around timing.
Medicines on OFI can languish there for many years
the denying access to Kiwis
of life saving medicines.
You might ask why, because pharma doesn't have the budget.
This is simply a budget problem. It's a funding problem.
New Zealand's drug spend is less than half that of the
other comparable countries like Australia and uk.
There is not much pharma can do
if they're not allocated the budget to fund these medicines
and provide access.
They have done all the evaluation.
They found these medicines to be valuable
and impactful for Kiwis,
but they do not have the funding to make it accessible.
We anticipate that the outcome
of this petition select committee hearing might be
to refer this to phar.
You might classify this
as an issued a problem for p to solve.
This is not a P problem, this is a government problem.
Pull up in the chair of P has recently said
that we need a billion dollars to give New Zealanders access
to medicines that saves their lives.
We formally request here not to refer this petition to P
and instead grant us a hearing at Health select committee,
health Health select committee
to ensure courageous Kiwis like Catherine
or battling cancer can access the medicines they need.
As you heard today, Keytruda is founded in
40 other countries.
US Kiwis deserve this too.
We deserve to have access to medicines
that help us live and live well.
Thank you.
Alright, thank you.
Look, we've got time for a couple of questions, um, members,
Um, if I may, Mr.
Chung, um, I just wanted to, uh, say to Catherine
that your effort
and your courage to um,
put this petition forward is, is amazing and appreciated
and that we hope that it'll bear fruit. Thank you.
Well, thank and just reflect that
for the whole of the committee.
Um, I see that FAC is finalizing, is assessing,
um, pembro.
Zoma probably that's not a very good pronunciation.
Pembro. Pembro Elizabeth.
Pembro Elizabeth, which is Keytruda.
Yeah, that, that is Same drug.
Okay, well thank you for clearing that up.
Can I ask a clarification question? Yes,
Nancy Lou.
Hi. Um, just asking for a clarification question, uh,
if you can just repeat that Keytruda is accessible
and funded in other jurisdictions
that are comparable like Australia
and the impact of that for patients.
That is correct. And um, that means that patients, um,
are less likely to, um, advance to a, um,
metastatic stage of the disease, which means
where the cancer has spread to other parts of the body,
which is when it becomes terminal and incurable.
So it is, it is absolutely vital
that Keytruda is funded in the early stage setting.
This actually prevents the healthcare system additional cost
for a recurrence
and ongoing treatment in the metastatic setting where treat,
where it is a non-curative seating.
And the study that Catherine referred to, um, shows
that on a very large scale international study,
this medicine has proven to reduce the risk of recurrence
and, uh, improve the overall survival for patients
with triple negative with early stage
triple negative breast cancer.
Thank you everyone. Alright, look,
well thank you very much and um,
Catherine was it you just welcome anything
you would like just to sum up.
Yes. So I, I'd just like to say, uh,
we deserve five in chance.
Um, and, uh, you know, as stated, we all just want to live
and, um, but I'm, I'm trying really hard not
to be emotional about this.
Um, but I've worked all my, I've worked hard all my life
and I've just about lost everything.
Um, so how do I, how do I tell my children to say,
um, to do things like when I've done everything
right of an actual fact?
Um, I haven't, uh, I've been penalized
and you know, I've been told I can go
to Australia and get the treatment.
Australians aren't gonna give me the treatment.
And even if I could go to Australia,
I've still got bills to pay back home.
I still need a support network and I want to stay home.
This is my home. This is where I'm born, this is
where my support network is.
And I, you know, I don't want my face flattered all
through the media, but I'm doing it
because somebody has to stand up.
I don't want everyone knowing I've lost $700,000.
I don't want people knowing I've lost everything.
I pride myself that I'm a leading business advisor
and here I am losing everything.
You know? Uh, it, it doesn't, it doesn't bode well.
I don't know what the future's gonna hold
for me on a professional point of view
by putting myself out there, but I have to do this.
I cannot sit by
and watch more people
go without an equality inequality of treatment.
I can't even talk to people about having this treatment, um,
without feeling guilty that they're not.
And I'm actually also in a disadvantaged position.
Ms. Sorry Greg.
Alright. Look, well thank you
and once again, thank you for your courage
and for the fight that you are taking up for people, um,
in your position now
and more importantly in the future. So thank you very much.
Thank you. Could you explain to me the next step?
Will we be, uh, recommended to the health committee
or we make recommendations to government?
No, the committee will now look at the evidence we have,
we've had, um, submissions from
and we will then, um, decide what we'll do
and where we'll direct.
But we'll certainly take on board your
preferences and recommendations.
Just before I do go, I just had a guy approach me.
He had triple negative breast cancer
and he'd been, uh, if it wasn't the Katrina, he would be,
would've been dead a few years ago and he's still here.
So, um, you know, he just sent me that message just
before he said, thank you for doing
what you're doing, but not just me.
It's not just one minute from me
and families communic a whole lot. Thank you for your time.
Alright, thank you. Thank you. Alright.
Yeah,
All thank you members.
We'll come back to discussion.
Um, we'll go to item 23.
Tony Gore
again online.
Yeah. Unmuted if you go.
Oh, thank you.
I'm trying to turn my camera on.
Well, Tony, we can hear you but can't see you.
I'm trying to figure out my camera.
We're hearing a nice stage whisper there.
Sorry, Mike. Oh, there we go.
Alright, we've, we've got you
and all we need is your voice now to match with your,
would you like to say something?
Can you fell? See me? Oh, I've got you. Good.
Now did you hear introductions before?
No, I've just joined on.
Alright, so just briefly.
Greg O'Connor, chair of the committee. I'm
Na uh, national Party MP for Newland Paolo Garcia.
And I'm Hamish Campbell with MP
for Island down in Christchurch.
Alright, uh, Tony, we've got your submission
and we've, um, you've got 10 minutes, so take it as read,
but uh, obviously speak to it
and preferably some time for questions.
Awesome. Um, so yeah, my name is Tony Gore.
Um, I, I would would like to say thank you for inviting me
to have this discussion with you guys.
I do understand that I, AI is not currently in, um,
but however the traffic light system in sanction is still
confusing for people like myself that has difficulty reading
and, um, for the pensioners
and people that have lost jobs due to um,
companies closing down for argument's sake, Nelson,
there has three been three companies down there
that has shut down.
Um, because personally I don't know the reason why.
Um, but for those people it would be hard for them
to understand the sanctions
and the traffic light system for a a pensioner.
They won't understand it either.
'cause I know these, some pensioners that are bigger, bigger
are on the partner's pension,
um, and they are able to work.
But due to health issues
they can't work.
Um, and use that may need to go on the benefit it
for some time.
It may be 14 year olds, they wouldn't understand sanctions.
Um, I am A DHD and due to this I have trouble reading.
Um, so as far as it goes for me working,
it's hard to find a job.
Um, Yeah, sorry,
I'm just a bit nervous, but that's all I
That's alright. Take, take
your, take your time.
Just, uh, you're doing very well.
Just, uh, we've got, just, just take your time
and think about what, I'll
Give some a bit of time over to my mother
to have a few words as well, if that's okay.
Yeah, that's fine.
Oh, Kiara, good Up. Good afternoon.
My name's Cheryl, boy
and I am, I actually piggyback my
husband's superannuation.
I'm only 57 and he is retired.
But I was told when I went onto the, the, the benefit that
personally myself, I am still work tested now,
these traffic light systems, I'm sort of asking my kids
and they're going, ah, we don't know.
It is really, really confusing.
Where personally I stand under the system, um,
six months ago of I've just had a total knee replacement,
I'm recovering, I'd love to be able to work, I really would,
but I can't do due to ill health
and I actually am my husband's caregiver.
My kids like Tony come up to me and,
and say, well how, how does this work?
And, and as I've said,
and I've been listening to the news,
if people cannot get a job in 52 weeks, why bring
that down to 26 weeks?
Because it's still really difficult for them.
Um, you know, I understand there's
no hope is out there that,
that just sit on their backside, expect benefit.
They're the ones that should really be targeted
and I know there's a lot of them, they're capable to work,
but smoking drugs or drinking is more important to them.
But yet taxpayers are paying
for them to do that.
They're the ones that should be targeted on the traffic
light system in my opinion
because they're just lazy out and out lazy.
Um, there's one people out there they've been working
for, for some unknown reason
and a lot of this I do understand that it is COVID
businesses have shut down.
They can either find a new job in the industry
that they know or they've gotta go on a benefit and try
and apply for skills, et cetera to be able to upskill
to find another job.
Next minute they're on this traffic light system
and they don't understand what's going on.
I just feel that, yeah, I agree with the system,
I really do, but I just feel that the, the,
the minister has not explained it in a way
that people can understand it. Um,
So sorry, did you say you agree with the system?
I do agree with the system.
I do agree because you need to have something in place
for people that just expect their benefit
to arrive in their bank account
and say, well no, I'm not going to work.
I know of a few people that have
been under the traffic light system.
My daughter was one, she's a mother of six children,
she had a part-time job.
She went to work and then come
and said, look, I need to get my restricted license.
I can only do this Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday.
I've got no children at home.
They organized it for a Saturday while she was getting up,
working, going home, trying to sort her children out
because the father was useless, go back to work
and try and fit in this.
Due to that she went into the, I think she went to Orange,
she's now been told she can't go
through working income again now
to get her restricted license.
She couldn't understand and she was trying really hard.
She would text and text and text
and say, I cannot do this on a Saturday.
So she got penalized in the traffic light system
for not meeting her obligations,
but yet she was trying to communicate
and that was really difficult for her.
Um, so there are faults in it,
but there's some good stuff in it too.
So I'll let Tony finish off.
Thank you for listening to me.
Alright, thank you. Sorry, what was your first name?
Cheryl with a c
Cheryl. Okay. Thanks
Cheryl.
Alright, Tony, that's uh,
you're lucky to have mum there to help.
So I'm open for questions if few fellows have any.
Alright, that's great.
Uh, got any questions from the, not really. Thank you.
I think there's a very clear, clear presentation.
So what would improve?
So, okay, so once you move onto the orange,
have you been explained what needs to happen
to get back to green?
No, we haven't.
We haven't been told if we go to Orange,
we haven't been told what we've gotta do.
If we've gone to red, we still dunno what we've gotta do
to go back to green.
And are you on red now? Did say?
No, I'm on green. Um, I had, I was working
and I had to give up because my health has
gone downhill quite badly.
And Cheryl, you're on the green?
Yes, I'm on green. I have met all,
well I meet all the obligations.
I do not like going to work in income for anything
I would say. Alright, so
I'll be borrow.
It is, if, if we've got to go to work in income, it means
that we have tried everything possible
but we, I am on the green
because, um, I piggyback my husband's
superannuation and I managed to get in
before the laws changed that I had to be work tested.
But I'd still love to work but I've, I've got to heal myself
before I can do it.
It's taken me a long time to get this knee done.
Um, so essentially you were making submissions on behalf
of others who are struggling to understand and Yeah.
Who have gone onto the orange and,
and the red. Is that right?
Yes. Yes. Alright, well look, daughter, thank you
Daughter. My daughter,
sorry.
My daughter went on orange
and she only found out through going on her my MSD
she wasn't notified by mail.
She didn't get a phone call from the case manager that, that
did her onto, uh, this
driving school.
Nothing. It wasn't until she went onto my MSD
and you were now on orange
and she's going, whoa, what, what,
you know, she didn't understand.
Made an appointment when we went in and we sorted it out.
And is she back on? Is she back on green now?
She is back on green and she's me, she's doing everything.
The relationship now broken down.
Um, so at the moment my daughter
has got her children spread out everywhere
and is couch surfing until she finds a home.
But because she's only been in a, in a um,
house in New Zealand home, it's very hard for her
to find one at the moment.
But she is on the green, she's been into work and income
and explained everything to them
and she wants to stay on the green
because she wants to find work as well.
Um,
Alright, well look, tha thank you very much.
I think it's been very useful for the committee to get a,
an insight, um, particularly the three different cases,
which gives a much better way of looking at it.
So, um, certainly we appreciate the, uh, you know, the,
the effort, taking the time to make the petition,
bring the petition to us and, and explain it so well.
So really appreciate it.
Thank you very much. Alright, thank you.
And thank uh, thank you Tony. Thank you.
Alright, thank you Tony. Okay, bye.
And our last one,
it's uh, is it's st is it?
Yes, you're correct. Is That the right pronunciation?
Yes, that's correct. S okay, Stephanie.
Now we're just, uh, getting our other
submitters into the room here. Um, Stephanie?
Yes. Um, who are from, um, mb?
They're all from mb. Great, thanks.
Alright, now, um, Stephanie, uh, I've just,
I'm Greg O'Connor, I'm the chairman of the, uh,
petitions committee and I have with me
Stephanie and Paula Garcia Newland
mp. Good to see you here.
Nice to see you again. Yes.
And I'm Hamish Campbell with MP
for Island down in Christchurch.
Alright. Hello.
Alright, Stephanie, now when you can take your petition
as read, but feel free to speak to it, um,
to outline your main concerns
and hopefully leave time for questions
after in your 10 minutes.
Thank you.
All right. Um, thank you.
Um, my name is Stephanie a Danza,
and thank you for hearing this petition.
I appreciate, um, you coming, uh,
still doing your job even in the bad weather.
Um, it genuinely means the world to have the chance to speak
to all of you, not just for me,
but for every person living
with chronic myeloid leukemia or CML.
In my petition, I ask you to amend 84.1 the list
of conditions and explicitly indicate the CML is not
included in this terrible, terrible list.
Before coming to New Zealand,
I showed my hematologist the immigration manual in this list
and he said, don't worry,
CML patients have a normal lifespan.
Now you just take your maintenance medication like someone
with hypertension or diabetes and so go for it.
And so I did, but when I first applied
for student visa Immigration, New Zealand assessed me as,
quote, unable to do the work or study that I am applying for
because I have CML and,
and it was in the list of malignancies.
It's a good thing that I was already studying online
and receiving academic excellence awards.
So that wasn't a medical judgment, that was
a tick box masquerading as medicine,
that was discrimination.
I have since arrived, I finished my master's degree at the
top of my class and have been employed here in Parliament.
Mm-hmm. Apparently my CML has nothing to do
with me being able to study your work.
MBIE says in their submission that the list
of high cost condition thresholds, uh, threshold don't apply
to temporary visas.
But that's simply not true
because on my, based on my experience,
it is quietly letting this list be
weaponized where it shouldn't.
The a1, according to MBIE was written in 2005
and last reviewed in 2021 in 2005,
CML really was a death sentence.
Treatment costs as much as the house deposit
back then not now, and survival was grim.
Fast forward to 2025. Generic pills are available.
We have normal life expectancy. We work, we thrive.
Immigration policy hasn't caught up.
We're still treating CML like it's 2005.
The year YouTube launched.
Butter was $2 and 80 a block and we were all on dial up.
Internet medicine medicine evolved. Policy stayed frozen.
CML isn't just another malignancy,
it's a single well-defined genetic condition
caused by one mutation.
B-C-R-A-B-L. It's not contagious, it's not genetic.
You get, don't get it from your parents.
MBIE calls it part of the malignancy group,
but it's not with treatment.
It doesn't behave like a malignancy anymore.
CML today is clinically managed like a chronic condition.
Calling it a malignancy in 2025 is like calling an electric
car a gas guzzler just because it has four wheels.
Many patients live more than 20 years after diagnosis.
In fact, the first person who went on trial
for CML in 2000 early two thousands is still alive today.
His name is Melman. We are not dying from CML.
We are living with it. We will die with it.
Leukemia and blood cancer in New Zealand says it best people
are now cured or living long productive lives.
That's not high care cost and that's success.
CML uh, MBIE says reviewing CML status would be complex
and resource incent intensive.
They already have sufficient evidence in their submission.
They know all about CML.
The real problem isn't lack of evidence,
it's lack of political will.
Pharma has already funded generics. Imatinib is generic.
The satin switched to generic
nilotinib is now an an annual tender.
That's sustainability.
That is how we address sustainability when it comes to CML.
We don't reject people who have CML.
We encourage form up
to subsidize Toyota Corolla brand the generics instead
of Rolls Royce original brands.
Once these patents expire, it's time to move
to the generics, which is what pharma does.
Sustainability comes from smart procurement
and up-to-date policy
because the sustainability sustainability we're proposing is
smarter not harsher.
In 2021 HIV was removed,
HIV didn't collapse immigration health policy.
It made it fairer. Doing the same
for CML will make it smarter.
Talking about HIVH, uh, mbi, MBIE said
that the treatment costs are comparable.
I think that is enough, you know, to remove CML also
in the global cases, HIV has 1.3 million new cases globally.
CML has 35,000 in New Zealand.
HIV had 97 cases in 2023.
Here CML is 50 cases annually.
HIV also HIV patients also still take lifelong medication.
And so does CML. The same logic applies.
If lifelong treatment didn't disqualify HIV,
it shouldn't disqualify.
CML Medical waivers are not a solution in practice.
They're discretionary and ate
and apply it inconsistency inconsistently.
I'm not asking you to dis dismantle the malignancy group.
We're asking for one evidence-based update, exclude CML.
Just as HIV was removed.
CML today is treated like hypertension,
not like a terminal cancer.
I ask you if MBIE says the CML is not listed, then I ask
that it should be listed as an exemption similar
to some ex exceptions explicitly listed in a four 10.1.
The this petition is not asking
to dismantle the entire malignancy group.
It is asking to exclude CML from the malignancies just
as HIV was removed from the high cost list
esteem members of parliament.
We want to future proof New Zealand, it should start
by updating policies that still think it's 2005 CML is like
that puffer jacket you packed for a summer holiday in Fiji.
It doesn't belong there.
It's outdated, retired and not coming back. Thank you.
Alright, thank you Stephanie.
Now members are any questions?
Alright, well I think, uh, it's quite clearly laid out
and I think with that, with your submission,
what I'm gonna do now is I'm gonna invite, um, our me envy
to the table and they will, um, speak to their
submission on this.
Um, and we may come back to you for a question,
so feel free to remain on.
So welcome to the table. Thank you.
We also had one person online, I'm not sure.
Oh, you you've got someone else online? Yeah,
Yeah, chief, chief medical Officer.
He's, uh, got the clinical knowledge. Uh, yeah, so
He's Oh, good. Hopefully
on hand too. Uh, Nicholas Scotland Toko.
I'm the principal analyst for the, um,
immigration health team and Immigration New Zealand.
And I've got Holly from, um, our MV policy section as well.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to make an oral submission
to the petitions community.
Um, yeah, I would like to start by saying that the, uh,
that chronic myeloid leukemia is not explicitly listed on
our a four 10.1 list of conditions, which have been deemed
to impose the most significant costs on demands on New
Zealand's Health Services, which, uh,
that list was arranged in conjunction with the Ministry
of Health and agreed to by cabinet.
Um, the categorization
of the medical conditions on the list do mean that, um,
chronic myeloid leukemia would probably come under a be
considered a blood cancer under the malignancies of organs,
uh, skin and he hematopoietic tissue.
Um, and, um, I'm sure a robot doctor could say
that a lot more eloquently than I could, um,
including a past history of,
or if you're currently under treatment for CML,
that would potentially come under there.
However, we do have an exception in there that says
that malignancies with intervals since treatment are such
that the probability of recurrence is less than 10%.
So there is potentially, uh, an ability
to look at whether somebody who has chronic CML,
which is in a well-managed phase may actually
not come under the broader grouping of, um, malignancies.
Um, we acknowledge that the outcomes
for CML patients have drastically improved in recent years
and that those that do respond really well to medication,
um, have a really, um, you know,
a a lot normal health expect, well normal life expectancy.
And, um, we do acknowledge that the costs
of the medication can also be considered relatively
low cost, um,
with any significant medical condition.
However, regardless of whether it's listed
or not, we still need to assess whether there are costs
to the health system, to the, um,
what are the medical interventions that would be required?
What is the prognosis of the applicant?
Um, just because a condition isn't on the list
or would be express discounted from the list doesn't mean
that we wouldn't fully assess it
and consider what the lifetime costs of
that condition might be.
Um, and while um, the petitioner has referenced HIV,
we still, we still consider whether HIV can impose costs
and demands on our health services.
It's still something we screen for.
It's still something that we assess,
but we look at each case on its individual merits.
Um, I think that, um,
we currently do have enough, um,
flexibility within our immigration instructions
to look at the particular circumstances of individuals
who have CML, um, to potentially either
accommodate them under the health instructions
or within our medical waiver instructions.
Um, and yeah, I think I'm not sure if, uh,
Rob would like to Dr.
Rob whether he would like to add anything.
Hi everyone, add a question. Welcome, Rob.
I might just add one question is that has, have people been
admitted to New Zealand under the
So that is a really good question.
Unfortunately, the way that the re the data is recorded
and our systems, that doesn't allow us
to report on specific medical conditions who was let in
or who wasn't with a specific medical condition.
Alright, thanks. Sorry to interrupt. Uh, go ahead. Uh, no,
That's just, just going to say that, uh, Nick,
you did very well in terms of, uh, explaining all that.
Um, I just wanted to add with, um, HIV for instance, um, it,
it was removed from the list
and it was specifically mentioned on the list,
but our medical assessors will still assess HIV in terms of
that they'd, uh, want to get a, a specialist report
that the person was being well managed
and compliant with their medication.
Um, and they weren't a public health risk, um, at all
with their, with their condition.
Um, and if that was the case, then they'd probably, um, uh,
or likely have an acceptable standard of health.
And the same with, um, malignancies.
Uh, if the, um, the risk of recurrence
of a malignancy was less than 10%,
it wouldn't actually be considered on that list of, um, uh,
a four point 10.1 conditions.
Uh, so all medical, um, conditions that are deemed to be,
if you like, significant medical conditions are still
assessed by medical assessors
to see if they would be high cost, um,
or a, um, a stretch on our resources.
All right, thank you. Can I, one other question.
Is this the, um, condition
that often people get transplants, um,
bone marrow transplants for
is this is not the No,
No. With,
um, CML you, um, if there was treatment failure
or a patient progressed, um, to an advanced phase CML,
uh, one of the options later down the track might be a stem
cell transplant, which, uh, probably in excess
of $200,000.
Alright, thank you members. Any other questions?
Um, doctor, is the case that, um,
the norm is that CML will not progress
or what causes CML to progress, uh, where it needs
to go into stem cell transplant?
So a, a lot of the, um, I guess assessment
of CML is in the, uh, early recognition, um,
of CML
and, um, whether it responds to treatment
with the T-K-T-K-I, um, uh, medication,
um, and that's monitored over, um, I,
I think you get three months, six months
and 12 months where you actually monitor
the response to treatment.
Um, and you do sometimes get, um, resistance to treatment
and you change from first line to second line TKIs,
they're still relatively inexpensive.
Um, so the medical assessor would ask
for a specialist report
and if that specialist report was favorable, then
that condition would be deemed as a favorable, um,
condition if you like.
Um, so it, it, it's all comes down to the individual
case and we ask for specialist reports, um,
and likely prognosis and outcomes
and, um, when you have, um, chronic phase
and it's well managed, um, that would, uh,
more than likely be looked upon as favor favorable
to, to the applicant.
So it's all about the individual's response to treatment,
how they're managed, are they compliant with treatment, um,
and everything is, um, looked at on a case by case basis.
Alright, thank you. Now I'll just go back to Stephanie.
Now, now you've heard that it's not in, in of itself
a reason for immigration
failure or immigration to be turned down.
You accept that?
Yes. It a actually, I I'm glad that they brought it up
because if HIV was also like that,
I mean if it was removed from the list
and it's still being assessed individually, then
CML should also be the same.
Whether and
because, you know, what's the point
of removing HIV when it will still be assessed as,
um, an individual case?
So CML should follow?
It doesn't, it doesn't necessarily mean that, you know,
CML should be there because you can remove CML, like HIV
and it could, will be assessed as, um, an individual case.
So you are submitting that?
It should, it should never be a reason to
turn down immigration.
Um, I'm saying that it shouldn't be in the list of medic,
uh, it shouldn't be in the list
or should be excluded from the list
because the list explicitly says
that it's a condition deemed to impose significant costs.
So when it, if it is already viewed as comparable to HIV,
then it shouldn't be deemed as of significant cost.
Alright, thank you very much.
No, nothing else members, nothing else
but, um, can I just clarify, CML isn't listed specifically?
No, no. Whereas HIV was Yes. Listed specifically.
So it's not listed specifically.
So you, you accept that Stephanie?
Yes, but I, as I uh, mentioned in my experience, it,
it was said in the assessment,
CML is under the LI CML is listed in the A 4.101.
Alright. So it was assessed as to be deemed, um,
of significant cost.
Alright. But I don't think you're submitting
should never be a factor.
Are you not submitting that? It should never be a factor,
Never be a factor for That.
If someone had the condition that
it should never be able to be taken into consideration.
I am, I am saying that it shouldn't be firsthand, first
and foremost deemed to be a condition of significant cost
because it is not anymore.
Okay. It tends, Thank you very,
it tends still be a factor like HIV like, like
how HIV is assessed.
Alright. Alright.
Well thank you very much and thank you very much, uh,
for um, MB officials.
Uh, much appreciated. And as usual on a Thursday afternoon,
we've learned a lot more than we did when we
came into this room, which is, uh, a lot
of the petitions committee.
Thank you very much. Thank
You. Thank you.
Thank you.